Internals of Nova part 2: Rows for the Row God, Columns for the Column Throne! (#15)
trynova/website: pages/blog/internals-of-nova-part-2.md

---
title: Internals of Nova Part 2 - Rows for the Row God, Columns for the Column Throne!
description: Looking at more of the secret sauce that makes Nova.
date: 2024-09-14
authors:
  - name: Aapo Alasuutari
    url: https://github.com/aapoalas
---

[Last time](./internals-of-nova-part-1.md) I talked about how non-ordinary objects in Nova delegate their object features to a "backing object". This allows "exotic objects" to focus on the features that they are meant for and not get bogged down in the details that is JavaScript objects. This saves us some memory on every exotic object, but there is nothing particularly amazing about this trick. Any old engine could do the same thing and reap the same benefits.

> This time I will delve into the foremost idea behind Nova's heap structure; this idea is also what has driven me to dedicate my time to Nova. The name of this idea is the "heap vector" but more generally what I am talking about is [entity component system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity_component_system) and [data-oriented design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data-oriented_design).

Reviewer: **suggestion:** I wouldn't call ECS a generalization of the heap vector. The heap vector would rather be equivalent to the component vectors of an ECS. Could probably use some re-wording IMO.

## Data-oriented design

Data-oriented design is a software design pattern or philosophy originating from the games industry, although one could perhaps argue that data-oriented design is the original design philosophy of software in general. In an abstract sense, a program is nothing more than input data and transformations that act upon said input data. A program's function is then to perform those transformations and do it as efficiently as possible (with some constraints, eg. developer time) to produce correct output from the input data.

When we write a program, it is then fairly obvious that we cannot design the correct transformations without knowing what our input and output is, and more importantly we cannot design the transformations to be efficient without knowing our input data. As the input changes, the transformations must change and thus our program must change.

> Data-oriented design's first tenet is thus that we must know our data. If we do not know our data, we do not know the transformations we need to produce correct output, and that transformation is eventually the program that we must write. If we do not know our data, we do not know our problem. As developers, our job is not to write software; our job is to write programs that solve the problem at hand. If we do not know our data, we cannot do our job.

Reviewer: **praise**: This section sounds a bit like Mike Actons famous talk 😉.

**suggestion**: An idea would be to qoute or reference his talk here as a "hook" for this section?

Author: Yeah, I was definitely calling back to it in my own words. Then I started watching the talk again and found that I shouldn't try saying it in my own words so much and should just copy him more :D

Data-oriented design is all about solving or at least mitigating this issue. To do so, we must know our data and use that knowledge to minimize memory usage which always improves cache usage, and we must take into account the CPU caches when desigining our software. The important thing here is that a CPU loads data into cache not byte-by-byte but in cache lines. This is usually 64 bytes at a time, though recent CPUs have bumped this number up to 128 bytes.

```rs
#[repr(align(64))]
struct CacheLine([u8; 64]);
```

When we load a piece of data we load a full cache line into the CPU, no matter how small a part of it we actually want to use. Loading this one cache line from main memory takes 200 nanoseconds. Now, if we only use a single byte (or worse, one bit!) of that data then the vast majority of the data loaded is wasted. What we want is to ensure that as much of the cache line gets used, especially if we are in a tight loop.

> 

Reviewer: **suggestion**: Maybe you could add another heading or horizontal rule here to split this section into two parts: "what is DOD" and "the 'applied' example".

Let's take as an example an Array of Arrays in the V8 JavaScript engine.

```ts
const arr: Data[][] = await Promise.all(names.map(fetchDataForName));
```

Now say we are interested in how many `Data` entities there are in total: We will loop over the `arr` Array, accessing each Array in it, and tallying up the length:

```ts
const dataCount = arr.reduce((acc, dataArray) => acc + dataArray.length, 0);
```

In terms of memory access patterns, a V8 Array looks roughly like this:

```rs
struct Array(*mut ArrayHeapData);

// Size is 32 bytes in Node, 16 bytes in Chrome with pointer compression
struct ArrayHeapData {
    map: *mut Map,
    elements: *mut FixedArray,
    length: u32,
    properties: *mut FixedArray,
}
```

> When we reduce through `arr`, we must first access the `elemeents`. In this case it gives us roughly something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we reduce through `arr`, we must first access the `elements`. In this case it gives us roughly something like:
```

```rs
struct FixedArray<const N: usize> {
    length: usize,
    entries: [*mut ArrayHeapData; N],
}
```

From here we can chase each `*mut ArrayHeapData` to get to the `length` data contained in each, which we then load and sum up.

> It is fair to assume that most of these `ArrayHeapData` structs are located close to each other: We shall assume that they are actually right next to one another which means that we can fit two of them on one cache line (four in Chrome). What we want out of each `ArrayHeapData` is a single `u32`, that is 4 bytes. This means that we use 8 bytes (16 in Chrome) of every 64-byte cache line. That is a usage rate of 12.5%. In expert circles this is called "bad".

Reviewer: **confusion**: Why is it double in chrome?

Author: An Array's data in V8 without pointer compression takes up 4 * 8 bytes, of which the `length` part is either an SMI (31 bit number) or a pointer to a HeapNumer if the length is over the SMI limit. Effectively then, it's ~always a ~32 bit integer.

With pointer compression, which is in use in Chrome/Chromium but not in Node, all pointers become just 4-byte indexes from the beginning of the heap (so 0 is beginning of heap, 1 is 4 bytes from the beginning, ...) instead. So now an Array's data takes up 4 * 4 bytes and the `length` part is again either an SMI or an index to a HeapNumber. But it's still effectively always a ~32 bit number, so we're still reading the same amount of data, but more of these fit on a single cache line (4 when it was 2 before). Thus, the amount of the cache line that is actually interesting to us doubles.

> Because we assumed that all the `ArrayHeapData` are right next to each other, the CPU will actually aggressively prefetch data for us during this reduce action and we might find that we only pay the memory latency a few times, and after that we are bound by the memory bandwidth. Hearing this, you might think that we it is actually fine that the cache usage rate is so low: The CPU prefetching handled any possible problems we might have otherwise had.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we assumed that all the `ArrayHeapData` are right next to each other, the CPU will actually aggressively prefetch data for us during the reduce operation and we might find that we only need to pay the increased memory latency of main memory access a few times, after which we are bound by the memory bandwidth. Hearing this, you might think that we it is actually fine that the cache usage rate is so low: The CPU prefetching handled any possible problems we might have otherwise had.
```
**suggestion**: Could use some re-wording/structuring. Also are we talking about the memory bandwidth of the CPU, RAM, L-Caches?

Author: This is actually pretty badly sourced. I don't _really_ understand CPUs deeply enough, I'm just kind of guessing/assuming that there are three (four) possible bounds to an algorithm's / process' / computer's performance:
1. CPU bound: We have all the data we need and more could be brought in, we just cannot execute computations any faster than this.
2. Memory bandwidth bound: We do not have all the data we need but we know exactly where it all is well enough in advance to start streaming it in before we actually need it. But, we cannot load data from RAM "in a wide enough stream" to saturate our CPU (or the bandwidth is just badly utilised). The entire memory bus is 100% utilised the whole time, it's just not enough. (EDIT: So this is between the CPU and the RAM.)
3. Memory latency bound: We do not have all the data we need and we do not know where it all is before we need it.
4. I/O bound: God damn spinning disk of rust! Spin faster!

... To be continued...

Author: So my guess/assumption here is that the very first steps of the algorithm will be effectively memory latency bound. After that, we will be streaming data in via prefetching and processing it up as it comes. But: Our data isn't particularly dense and our computations aren't particularly heavy so we end up not being CPU bound; we can easily do all the computations we need to before we need to make room for the next "step" of the incoming data stream. Most of the time the CPU is idle, waiting for the next data to come in. When it comes in, we perform a few CPU operations and go right back to idling.

```rs
struct ArrayHeapData<const N: usize> {
    elements: [ElementIndex; N],
    lens: [u32; N],
    caps: [ElementCapacityWritability; N],
}
struct ArrayVec {
    // Note: Invalid Rust, 'cap' cannot be referred to as const generic. This is only to show the idea.
    ptr: *mut ArrayHeapData<cap>,
    // Note: Use u32's as we index using u32; usize would be unnecessarily large.
    len: u32,
    cap: u32,
    backing_objects: HashMap<Array, OrdinaryObject>,
}
```

Now the common case for a JavaScript Array needs only 9 bytes of memory. Iterating over multiple Arrays to access one "part" of them only accesses those parts and none of the others. Cache line utilisation heretofore unimaginable in a JavaScript engine is attainable as easily as just writing the code. This ... this could change things.

## Post scriptum: What about Objects?

Let's take a quick detour to Objects as well. First thing is that we drop out the "elements" store from ordinary objects. Objects usually have named properties, only rarely do they have indexed properties. If what you want is indexed properties, then an Array is what you should use.

> A `Map` like in V8 is still very much necessary, though we will call it a `Shape`: Without shapes, a JavaScript engine cannot optimise prototype accesses and that then means that calling prototype methods becomes _very_ expensive indeed. That is then basically all we need, and here is what we're left with:

Reviewer: **confusion**: What is a `Shape`? Would be nice with some more context/a basic explanation for us noobz here.

Author: Ah, that's a great question. I'll probably have to just link to V8's explanation on them.

Basically, a Shape describes an object's, well, shape. For V8 it includes things like the size of the object in bytes, number of inobject properties, object prototype, object property descriptors (in order), and other relevant metadata. The idea is that a JS program will often create similar objects over time, and the number of different kinds of objects in the program is limited. Hence, it makes sense to separate the shared parts of an object from the instance specific parts.

This way, at the engine level these two objects share the same shape and thus the property keys and prototype field exists only once. Only the values are saved per-instance.
```ts
const a = { x: 3, y: 4 };
const b = { x: 0, y: 5 };
```

This system also allows caching the `hasOwnProperty` property lookup result in this case:
```ts
function hasX(obj) {
  return obj.hasOwnProperty("x");
}

hasX(a);
hasX(b);
```
The `hasX` function gets called with two different objects, but those objects have the same shape so they will get the same result for `hasOwnProperty` lookup. Thus, an inline cache can be arranged:
```rs
struct InlineCache {
  shape: *mut Shape,
  result: Option<Value>,
}
```
We check if `obj.shape == inline_cache.shape` and if it is equal, then we can return `inline_cache.result` directly. If someone goes and does something evil like `Object.getPrototypeOf(a).hasOwnProperty = () => false` then a "validity cell" mechanism gets triggered that invalidates all inline caches that depend on the modified object's shape.
